# Test Metadata

## Terms

- A single test log is generated by a *job* which may consist of more than one
  *step* (only one of which creates the log)
- Several jobs (each generating its own test log) may be running in a *run*.
- A CI service starts a run when there is new code to be tested.
- Sometimes a CI service configures different jobs in different places, but
  this doesn't affect the classification
- "time" refers to a specific date & time; "duration" refers to an amount of
  time (a number of seconds)

## Data types

Using these data types, where appropriate, will make analysis of data easier.

- All metadata is stored as strings, but some only ever contain digits so
  they can be treated as integers.
- Times are stored as POSIX-style integer seconds past the epoch (Jan. 1, 1970)
- Durations are stored in integer microseconds
- Booleans are stored as strings with "yes" or "no"
- Arrays are stored as strings with array values separated with a special
  character, usually a space

## General rules

- Don't include any information that you don't want made public. This is
  usually not a problem because the data will probably all be derived from
  public log files.
- Try to keep data mostly unchanged from its original form in the name of
  data preservation. It can always be massaged later. Exceptions are made for
  times and durations which should always be stored in the standard forms. In
  some cases, it may make sense to store an altered version in a separate field
  for ease of use.  In other cases, altering the format of a field may make
  sense if it is information-preserving and if the alternate is easier to work
  with (like times and durations).
- Because of the previous rule, some fields may have different values but the
  same meaning. The interpretation of some fields may need to be gated by the
  contents of another field. e.g. the format of the "compiler" field might
  depend on the "buildsystem" field, or the values in the "ciarch" field might
  depend on the "origin" field.

## Mandatory

These are the mandatory metadata fields.

### origin

An indication of which service the test log originated from. Here are the
supported values:

 - appveyor: Appveyor
 - azure: Azure Pipelines
 - circle: Circle CI
 - cirrus: Cirrus
 - curlauto: Curl Autobuild system
 - gha: GitHub Actions
 - local: a local build

### checkrepo

Like `sourcerepo`, but for the repository for which the test run was made. In
the case of a GitHub pull request, this is the repo to which the pull request
is being made.

### account

Identifier of the account/project at the CI host. This must be omitted if it is
not relevant to the CI service in use.

### runid

A unique identifier for this test run. This only needs to be unique relative to
`origin`, `account` (if found) and `checkrepo`. This field is used to
de-duplicate test runs so the same log file isn't accidentally imported
multiple times. TODO: the problem of re-runs is currently ignored

### uniquejobname

This is a unique identifier for the CI job that created this test log (and no
other similar test logs). It can be used to compare subsequent test runs (on
later commits). These are important points to consider in choosing a value:

 - it only needs to be unique within the same 'origin', `account` and
   `checkrepo`
 - there may be at most one type of test log (type parsed by one parser)
   associated with the identifier
 - it should not be able for a user to create accidental collisions
   (e.g. by creating a new, carefully-crafted job name)
 - it isn't really intended for human use, but only for machine correlation
 - this is not to say the job is necessarily idempotent and unchangeable, but
   it's intended to stay the same run after run so users can see changes to the
   results over time

### runtriggertime

When the test run was requested to start running (in seconds since 1970).
If this is not available, then runstarttime can be supplied instead.
If this is not available, then runfinishtime can be supplied instead.
One of those three is mandatory.

## Recommended

These are some recommended metadata fields.

### runstarttime

When the test run started running (in seconds since 1970).

### runfinishtime

When the test run finished running (in seconds since 1970).

### jobstarttime

When the job started running (in seconds since 1970).

### jobfinishtime

When the job finished running (in seconds since 1970).

### sourcerepo

An identifier of where the source being tested came from. This might be e.g. a URL
to a GitHub repo.  In the case of a GitHub pull request, this is the forked
repo.

### commit

Identifier of the source being tested. This is relative to `sourcerepo`. This
field may end up becoming mandatory, since knowing the source is essential to
understanding the test results.

### branch

Identifier of the branch of the source being tested. This is relative to `sourcerepo`.

### ciname

If jobs are configured in multiple places, this is the name of the place where
this job is configured.

### cidef

If jobs are configured in multiple places, this is the location of the place where
this job is configured, like a file path.

### cijob

The job name.

### cistep

The step name.

### url

A URL to a page giving more details of the results of this test run.

### testformat

The kind of test log that was parsed to obtain these results.
